########################################################################
##
## CPX String Translation Updates
##
## Scott Wiersdorf
## Created: Tue Nov  8 00:27:59 GMT 2005
##
########################################################################

This document describes the process for string translation for the CPX
control panel.

CPX String Translation

This document describes how to translate CPX "strings" into another
language so that visitors whose web browsers are set to prefer a
language other than English may view the control panel in their
preferred language.

Background

Nearly all modern web browsers have settings for language preferences
where the client can store, in order, their preferred languages. For
example, if my native language were German, I might change my web
browser's language preference to "de". If I lived in Switzerland, or
prefered the Swiss-German dialect over other kinds of German, I might
set my language preference to "de-ch" first, and "de" second if no
Swiss-German content is available. Web browsers send this information to
Apache when a page request is made; programs that interact with Apache
can request the list of languages to know what content to return to the
web browser.

CPX Localization

CPX receives the list of language preferences from Apache when a page
request is made by a web browser. CPX uses that list to determine which
language strings to use when generating the control panel web pages to
send back to the web browser.  Currently the only languages supported by
default are US-English and Japanese.  

Unsupported Languages

In time, we hope to be able to support many more languages, and we will
as we find reliable translators. Until then, however, you may have an
urgent need to display CPX in an unsupported language. The rest of this
document describes the steps you can take to translate CPX strings so
they will automatically appear in web browsers who have that same
language set as their preferred language.

Quick Overview

The short of translation is this:

- create the preferred language directory in /usr/local/cp/strings
- translate the new strings into the preferred language

That's it.

Create Language Directory

The first step is to decide what the appropriate abbreviation for your
language is. The quickest way to find that is to look in your browser's
language preferences list. I recommend the Firefox web browser to start
with, though you'll probably have consensus among browsers for most 
common languages.

For our example, we'll take German/Switzerland. The language-country
code is "de-ch". Based on this, the name of our locale directory will
be "de_CH". The rule is:

  - replace the hyphen with an underscore
  - make lowercase both language code letters
  - make uppercase both country code letters

If a language does not have any country-specific dialects (e.g., Finnish
or "fi"), the name of the language directory would be the same as the 
two-letter language code in lowercase (e.g., "fi").

With this, now, we can create our directory and copy strings in one fell
swoop (first make sure that de_CH does not already exist!):

  # cd /usr/local/cp/strings
  # cp -rp en_US de_CH

Translate Strings

Now we can begin our translation. This can be done in several ways; the
best way is the way you are most comfortable with. You can edit the
strings directly on the server using vi, emacs, or pico. You can edit
the strings by downloading them to your home or office computer and edit
them using any text editor.

The steps are simply:

  - open each XML file with your editor
  - replace English strings between XML tags with their translated
    equivalent

For example, we can open the "cp.xml" file, which contains many commonly
used strings. Here we'll find a section like this:

  <cp_quota_limit>Limit: </cp_quota_limit>
  <cp_quota_used>Used: </cp_quota_used>
  <cp_quota_allocated>Allocated: </cp_quota_allocated>

These we edit and translate into our best Swiss-German:

  <cp_quota_limit>Grenze: </cp_quota_limit>
  <cp_quota_used>Benutzt: </cp_quota_used>
  <cp_quota_allocated>Zugeteilt: </cp_quota_allocated>

Note that the XML elements (tags) themselves are not translated. Editing
the XML element names themselves will cause CPX to break when that 
string is required.

Continue translation until you're satisfied that everything you need has
been done.

Testing the Translation

Now we can open our browser and set our preferred language to
German/Switzerland ("de-ch"). We load the control panel into our browser
and we can now see German strings instead of English strings.

If we set our browser to prefer plain German ("de") instead of
German/Switzerland, we'll get English again because we don't have a
plain "de" branch in the strings directory.

To accomodate users who have set their browsers to plain German, we can
create a symlink in our strings directory:

  # ln -s de_CH de

Now any requests for 'de_CH' or 'de' will receive the German strings. If
we decided at some point that the Swiss-German were different enough 
from plain German, we could remove our symbolic link, copy the 'de_CH'
directory to 'de' (as we did above with 'en_US') and change any strings
necessary.

Risks

Until the CPX branding system is completed, there is a risk that future
CPX updates will leave your localized version missing some strings. We
will announce string updates through our normal notification channels.

########################################################################

