########################################################################
##
## CPX String Translation Updates
##
## Scott Wiersdorf
## Created: Wed Sep 28 22:14:28 GMT 2005
##
########################################################################

This document describes the process for string translation for the CPX
control panel.

Terminology
===========

"developer" is someone with CVS access and is comfortable checking out
sets of files based on CVS tags or dates.

"liaison" is a product manager or someone else assigned to interact with
the translator.

Background
==========

CPX strings are XML files stored in a directory hierarchy that indicates
the language and country code as described in RFC 1766 (tags for the
identification of languages), ISO 639 (language code pages) and ISO 3166
(country code pages).

For example, US-English CPX strings are stored in the CPX base strings
directory, subdirectory 'en_US'. Japanese strings are stored in the
'ja_JP' subdirectory and so forth.

By default, all new strings are created in US-English and saved in the
corresponding en_US XML string file.

Packaging
=========

For a translator to have the correct English strings, they'll need a
copy of the latest (or latest approved) English string files, as well as
the latest string files for their language.

A developer or someone assigned to manage string translation updates for
CPX should check out the latest (or latest approved) US-English XML 
strings from CVS and save them as a compressed tar file. These commands
at a terminal prompt will accomplish this:

  cd (CVS SOURCE DIR)/vps2/user/local/cpx/strings
  tar --exclude="CVS" -zcvf /tmp/strings-en_US.tar.gz en_US

as well as the latest string files for the language being translated
(e.g., Japanese):

  tar --exclude="CVS" -zcvf /tmp/strings-ja_JP.tar.gz ja_JP

This may be done automatically by using the 'dist-strings' and
'dist-help' make targets. For example:

  make dist-strings

will create language archives for all languages. The archives are
created in the same directory as the Makefile.

Transportation
==============

These string archives should be sent to the product manager or other
assigned liaison with the translator of this language. This liaison is
responsible for giving the string archives to the translator.

Translation
===========

The translator does not need to install the strings in order to
translate them, but it may help. If the translator is comfortable
translating strings without verifying their representation, the
translator simply needs to unpack the files and translate them using
their preferred text editor.

String files should be encoded in UTF-8.

If the translator requires a control panel to review the translation,
the liaison should be responsible for acquiring a test account from QA
and giving the pertinent login and host information to the translator.

For translation review in a control panel, the translator will need to
replace the default strings directories with the copies sent to
him/her. These commands at a terminal prompt will accomplish this:

  cd /usr/local/cp/strings
  rm -rf en_US
  rm -rf ja_JP
  tar -zxvf /tmp/strings-en_US.tar.gz
  tar -zxvf /tmp/strings-ja_JP.tar.gz

The control panel will now display the new strings. No action is
currently necessary to make the control panel display new or changed
strings other than refreshing the browser window (this is subject to
change as performance caching is implemented).

Updating
========

Once translation is complete and has been verified correct by the
translator, the developer needs to commit the new strings to the CVS
repository.

The liaison may ask the translator to package the strings and send them
back, or the liaison may give the developer the host and login
information of the account used for translation review.

If the translator will be packaging the strings him/herself, they will
need to execute these commands at a terminal prompt to create string
archives:

  cd /usr/local/cp/strings
  tar -zcvf /tmp/strings-ja_JP-new.tar.gz ja_JP

The string archive may now be e-mailed to the liaison, who should
forward the archive to the developer.

If the developer will be packaging the strings (this is preferred), the
developer will execute the above commands and 'scp' or 'rsync' the
archive to the preferred development server.

The developer should ensure the following criteria on the strings files:

- the files are encoded in UTF-8
- the files contain UNIX newline line endings (\n)

The following command may be used to convert DOS/Windows newlines to
UNIX newlines:

  perl -pie 's{\r\n}{\n}g' /usr/local/cp/ja_JP/*.xml

Once the criteria have been met, the developer should commit the new
string changes to CVS and request the master server gatekeeper to
install the new strings onto the master server and 'vlog' the updates.

The liaison should then be notified of the completed string updates for
this language.

########################################################################

